I saw you on Twitch like a, maybe like a week ago, a week or two ago, and I was like, "Hey, I recognize that person."
Yeah. Excited to see you starting to stream. Is that something you're getting into?
Yeah. So I actually did. I think my first venture into Twitch was in 2018 for Advent of Code.
And I did that for a while and it was nice. But I never really, I think this is probably like my
biggest history. And I think part of the reason why is because I spent today a lot of time reviewing
people's codes. And like, there's the companies, the small company, we're not even 10 people.
But I, I'm spending last time coding. And actually, like the most time I spent coding
nowadays is when I'm twitching, because I can just like sit out, like I'll do here,
I'll sit here and I'll code with everybody, but it's just for coding.
Yeah, it's funny because people have very different experiences. Like some
people that I know that stream, the one I get the least amount of work done, because they're so
distracted by the chat and like by people watching. But it's pretty productive for me as well. I,
it's similar. Like I have so much that I do, like I'm juggling a bunch of different things, so.
It's funny because the projects that I was working on so far, I, I probably already
streamed like 10 days. And in the, I will, I will only do the lecture for real, like in the 80th or
90th day, so all the time before, first I was trying to do stuff with chat GPT. So it was
basically prompt engineering. And then it was rest and, and a little bit of C. So it was fun.
Like, because those are not things that I have experienced. So it was actually helpful doing
that with everybody, because people who actually know rest and actually know C, they were, they
were helping out. I at some point, I was even joking that it was like the equivalent of
to each place Pokemon, but for programming, because I was just hearing what people say and
they're like, okay, I'll try this. I'll try that. It is awesome when you have a decent size audience,
and there's people in there that know stuff better than you. It's like that combined with
chat GPT. It's like, it's like a super power. It's just, you don't, you're just like a body. That's
the other people are controlling. Yeah, just for a little bit of context, I, for the past, I guess,
two to three years, I've been in, in the servo space and specifically that's brought me to
backend JavaScript and everything I've been doing has been in backend JavaScript.
And most people know me from that, but I'm so relatively new to it, because I was spending
the previous four to five years in the elixir world. And as someone coming from another ecosystem
into the JavaScript world, I think I have a different perspective on like, just a type of
tools I'm used to, the things that I had available before that I no longer do. So I've been trying
to talk to more people that are from ecosystems. Like I had someone out from the Laravel ecosystem
a few months ago, because I think that JavaScript backend world, I feel like the bar is very low
in terms of what is considered like, okay, these are good tools. But I think that's mostly because
most of the people in that ecosystem just haven't seen kind of what's available in others. So
just getting more exposure to the other stuff that's out there, I think will help make the
JavaScript ecosystem better. I just feel like we just, it's not that there's any technical
limitation. It's almost like a cultural thing. Like we don't know that we can make stuff
better. And I feel like we don't look outside of our our bubble as much. So yeah, I was excited to
talk to you. And I have a bunch of questions and we'll just kind of run through them and it'll be
a casual conversation. I talked to you because you know, you bootstrapped a new ecosystem from zero,
like roughly zero. So I think there's a lot of interesting insight and hearing about that journey
and the kinds of specific details there. Does that make sense? Perfect. Cool.
So they created a language called elixir. When was that like 13 years ago,
12, 13, yeah, the initial prototype. It was like 12, 13 years ago, but the version that
became elixir today was 11 to 12 was a year later, kinder.
Nice. Yeah. So I want to hear like, how did that even happen, right? Because
creating a new, I mean, people create new frameworks. And that's like a little bit more
common. And you've heard of that. But that's usually sitting on top of an existing language
in ecosystem. But so creating a brand new language. How did that happen? What gave you the confidence
that I was viable? Because like, you know, creating the language seems like a lot of work. Like a
lot of things need to happen before it's even adopt your extraction. So yeah, I would love to hear
about that journey. So always started. So before I worked on elixir, I was a member of the Rails
framework, the Rails framework core team. And even back then, we were starting to hear a lot
about concurrency. Like we're starting to get like the first machines with multiple cores,
and then people wanted to deploy those things using all the cores in the machine. But it was
not really feasible. And we were working and improving those things over time. And today,
I like to say that like, everything that you do in your machine, it should be using your cores,
right? Like, because even your wristwatch today, it has like two or four cores.
Right. So we say a lot, Oh, like something is as low. This two is as low, like, you know,
and then we look at it, my tasks are running as low. And then when you look at it, it's just
using one core in your machine, which so there is a chance that things can get like four times
faster than resources are there. But for some reason, we are not using it. So but that's so
back then that's when it was starting. And I remember there was one bug report that
I still remember, because it was like, I think it was very significant for me, because somebody
said, look, we are running Rails in production. And when we have a spike in traffic, so, you know,
a lot of people are using the same time, they have autoscaling. So autoscaling would start a new
instance of Rails. And when that new instance was booting, it would get errors that were booting.
Somewhere in Rails boot process, things were failing when there were many requests at the same time.
And then when you get a bug report like this, like your first thing is like,
how I'm even going to reproduce this, right? Because it's like such a specific scenario.
And it's related to concurrency. It means that when when Rails is initializing requests are coming in,
there's something happening somewhere about to request come at the same time that makes things
fail. So like, how I'm going to reproduce it, I'm going to tackle this, I'm going to fix this.
And even if I do all those things, like, how can I be sure that I tested and fix it properly,
so that was kind of like one of the things that made me think if concurrency,
so running software on all the cores in your machine as efficiently as possible,
is going to become an important thing, I need to have better tools.
So it always started for me as like trying to find better tools for the problems that I was facing,
which I think really resonates like we were saying at the beginning of always like trying to look
outside. And that's how I started doing. And then so I put myself in this journey,
and I like to say that there were two points in this journey for that like,
change it, how I approach software. And the first one is functional programming,
and it means a lot of things to different people. But to me, what it means is that
if you get a lot of the concurrency issues that you have in OO or imperative languages,
is that, for example, in that case, I would have like two requests or two threads trying to change
the same place in memory, so try to mutate an object or something like that. And then because
we're trying to do at the same time, something would get corrupted. If you're lucky, you get
exception. If you're unlucky, you get a segmentation fault and the whole thing crashes. And the thing
about functional programming, again, it means different things to people. But to me, it's really
about instead of changing things in memory, we always transform things. So if I have a list with
10 elements, I want to delete one, now I get a list with nine elements. And we have ways of making
that efficient. But for me, this was like a big change, because there are ways that we can solve
problems. And sometimes you solve a problem by putting a tape on top. But if you can solve the
problem by removing the problem all together, then it sounds like very exciting. So I was like,
okay, this is great. And I want to learn more about this thing. I was convinced that it would
also help with a lot of sometimes when you're writing code, in the usual languages, like JavaScript,
Java, Python, C, right, like, when you call a method, for example, you pass something to that.
And that thing can change the arguments in ways that you don't expect, because you can always
change anything. So and I was like, well, that problem is just removed. Everything's going to be
more explicit about how data goes in, how data comes back. So for me, it was, it was a music cell.
And I was like, okay, I want to learn more. And then I started learning more about functional
programming languages, functional runtimes. And eventually I found the Arlington virtual machine.
So Elixir runs on the Arlington virtual machine. And the Arlington virtual machine was, it was
designed by Ericsson, which is a telecommunication company. And what is really interesting is that
we go back like 11 and 12 years ago, like everybody was talking about concurrency. It was in everybody's
radar. So if you see like the programming languages that were coming out at the time, like go closure,
they all had a concurrency storage of them, right? But Erlang does not, did not only have a concurrency
start because concoracies about, well, I want to use all the resources, all the cores in my machine
as efficiently as possible. But if you're working on a problem, eventually, like, if that problem
starts to grow, you cannot solve the problem only using a single machine. You have to use multiple
machines, right? And Erlang not only did concurrency, but it also did the next step. It did a distribution
of things and how you coordinate work across multiple machines. And it did that like three
decades ago. So for me, I was amazed. I was like, not only it has solved the next problem, it was
one step ahead, but it is one step ahead for like three decades. So I really fell in love with the
Arlington virtual machine. And at the beginning, I was like, okay, I want to learn more about the
synchronous machine. So I need a project. I am an impatient learner. Like, if you give me a book,
I return pages and I want to do something and then I drop the book, you know. So I was like,
I need something to do. And I was like, I'll try to create a program language. I don't have a CS
background. So I was like, I'm going to learn two things at once, or maybe learn nothing at once.
But I was like, okay, I'll create program language, I'll learn Erlang. And after I did that with time,
I felt like, hey, I think there is really an opportunity for something here for a programming
language that exposes the Arlington virtual machine in different ways. And that solves those problems
that the Arlington virtual machine, again, has been solving for a really long time. And just
one more thing related to this is that the web with time has become really, really closer to like
telecommunication systems, because telecommunication system, everything is connected. And information
is going and going back all the time, right? And that's why this is the web today. We are connected
to our phones, information comes, goals, we have IoT devices. So there's a lot of data going through.
And I thought like this, this technology is going to be fantastic for that. And that's pretty much,
yeah, that's pretty much the summarize version. No, that makes sense. It's funny because I haven't
thought about this stuff in a little while, and it's reminding me a few things on my own. So my,
my dad's actually a software engineer. Years ago, he mentioned Erlang to me, and he was like,
you should go look at Erlang. At the time, I didn't, I didn't understand why, like,
I didn't get it. But I remember him saying specifically that the functional programming model,
and specifically the actor model that's in Erlang, the model that you apply to make sure that it
works across multiple cores in a single machine is that same exact model works, whether the two
cores are on the same machine or on different machines. And at that time, like, again, like,
distributed systems weren't as common. And he was like, we've moved from one core to multiple cores,
the inevitable next step is distributing work across multiple servers. And stuff like Erlang
and functional programming are going to be very useful in that era. At the time, I was like,
okay, sounds good. And I didn't, I didn't understand any of it really. It didn't click for me. But I
came back years later, especially when I found Elixir, and I was like, okay, I remember Erlang,
but I remember my dad talking about it in a very positive way. And Elixir seems like a nice modern
way to address it. And for me, the concurrency thing you talked about is what drew me as well.
I originally had been doing stuff in C#. I needed like a better concurrency model. At the time,
Go was kind of sitting right there. Like you said, Go came out with like very intentional concurrency
baked in. And we built this, we're working on a, I'm not going to distribute data system at that time.
And there was an update to Go that made it throw, it would panic when you did concurrent map access,
which it wasn't doing before. And we updated and we realized, wow, we have a ton of bugs
in our system that we didn't know. So at that point, we were like, we can keep fighting with this,
or we can rethink like, like you said, we can remove the problem. That's when I found Elixir,
Erlang, I'll click together. It's okay, this whole class of problems of two things accessing the
same piece of data, entirely gone in this model. And you can still do everything. And actually,
that's just one of the many things that simplifies. So yeah, I think it's, you made a good point that
functional programming means a lot of things to a lot of people. And there's like a spectrum of,
of what that means. But for me, it's that it's, you think in this way where everything's actually
just simpler, it maybe takes a little while to like unlearn the way you used to think. But once
your brain switches over, it's actually a very simple model. I think it's very predictable, but
behaves in a way that you expect. And what I loved about Elixir was unlike other functional
programming languages. I think back then, people typically thought of like Haskell or like, you know,
do these more esoteric things. It was such a nice introduction to thinking this way, because you
need to go to the initial phase of rewiring your brain. But the step from going from whether you
were a Go programmer, as it looks a programmer, very easy transition. And you use it for a couple
months and your brain is rewired at that point, you start to think functionally by default. And that
means like a lot of things. And like, you know, like you said, you think about immutability, but
also things like like recursion becomes like a lot more natural thing in your head.
It like came out at such a good important time, at least for myself. So the other thing I was
going to ask is. Remember when it was? So I think 2015 for me 2014, 15, that is early. It was just
about one. Oh, so yeah, you were you were early. Yeah. Yeah. I think I got into it right when
Elixir in action got published. Or like, yeah, super early. Yeah. Okay. So I guess that is
relatively early. Yeah. So and again, I remember when I brought it to my team, they were like,
Oh, again, you're bringing us like another new thing that we got to learn. And then no one was
that excited at first. But I remember a specific person who wasn't very excited. And you know,
he gave it a shot and he ended up falling in love with it. And to this day, he's now started a new
company. His engineer has worked there 100% on Elixir and it's been almost 10 years now.
And it's really stuck with it. You know, what is cool from what is said, like, like your father
said, like, you know, if we went from concurrency, went to distribution, what is really interesting
is that Erlang went the opposite way, because Erlang was created. Multi-core wasn't really a thing.
So they did a distribution, right? And then when they had to think about multi-core, they're like,
Oh, we got it. Yeah, it's fine. Right. Like it just, it just works. And, and I think it's like one of the,
when you read and you learn more about how Erlang was created, in that, like, everything they were
doing was really pragmatic in the sense that they were trying to solve a problem, which is to build,
like, telephone switches and these kinds of applications. They did not say like, we want
functional programming, we want distribution, we want, like, like, actors, they were not thinking
about this, they were thinking like, what is, what are going to be the best abstractions for us to
solve those problems that we have at hand. And, and all the decisions derived from that. And
for me, like, this is, it's so interesting and so exciting, right? Like, to take such
and a problem-driven approach, like, this is a high-level language. Yeah, it's a whole bottom-up
verse top-down thing. Like, when, when you start at the bottom and like solutions emerge, you end
up with something a lot more resilient. And yeah, that point you made it is great. It's like, you know,
you really know when it's, it's a fantastic abstraction, when an entirely new problem comes up
and your model just works. You know, you've, you've discovered something that, that makes a lot of
sense. So when you actually ended up, you said it was like a project to learn. At some point,
you must have realized, like, you said you, this could be a lot bigger, it's gonna be very useful.
At what point do you feel like, okay, like, I can actually make a language that can be somewhat,
like, adopted, that feel impossible? Like, because that seems like such like an impossibility today.
So imagine starting there, it must have felt like, this even makes sense that I'm doing this.
So what, what happened is that I built this prototype and it was, and it was really bad in,
in many ways, but it was a really learning opportunity. It's like, the first extroversion,
and if you go back in the git history, it was actually object oriented, because that was the
background I had. And one of the things that I learned with this prototype was pretty much like
Erlang did many of the decisions correct. So I should just do what Erlang is doing and
try to extend on the parts where I feel it's lacking. That was like the big lesson from this
prototype. And then I worked on this prototype for like three or four months, and then it,
it, I was not happy with the result. And I stayed like the rest of the year. It started in January,
then the rest of the year, I was like, I did not touch it. But the idea was there in my head,
I was thinking like about the problems, how I would solve those problems, looking at other
ecosystems. And then at some point, I thought, hey, no, I think we can create some, I think,
and the value was always the Erlang virtual machine to me. It was always clear, like the value is
the Erlang virtual machine. And I thought, wait, I think we have an opportunity to create a language
that is going to provide certain characteristics. And, and it's a gap that is not filled in today.
So what I remember, I told like I had a consultancy with some partners at the time. I remember what I
told them is that if the future is really concurrent, and we're using mostly Ruby at the time, and then
we, we say that, and I think the future today is concurrent. And if we, if we for some reason we,
we think that Ruby is not enough, I told them what is the, what is, which language would we
migrate to? And I told them it would be closure. I think it was a language that at the time
most resonated with our practices of like being productive, being expressive, and closure brought
the concurrency story. But I said like, you know, like for better or for worse, it's like, I don't
want to rely only on a single option. So for example, me as a Ruby developer way back in 2006,
2007, I always thought like, like, I have, I have a symbol, it's Python. Like if, you know,
if I want to try something else, like something goes wrong with this, I have a bolt to jump into
and felt like, and then, and then I felt like it feels like if we have only a single option,
I don't think that's good. I would like to have more options just in the general sense.
And I would like to have an option that is not the JVM for whatever reason. And, and, and I think
we can try creating this option. And, and that's when they said, okay, you can work on Elixir part
time. So at that point, I was working on Elixir part time, but I knew, and I told them, like, look,
I can work on this for like two years, and nothing may come out of it. It will, it would be like,
we'll have to close down the project. There is no like adoption. And it's basically two years of
my time and opportunity cost that is going to go, to go down the drain. And, and this led to a
couple of things. So one of them is again, like, if you look at the languages at the time,
Microsoft, we got sharp, Apple came with Swift later, and then Google go like, if you look at the
competition, it's like, well, you know, you were a 30 person company in Brazil, right? And those
are literally like the richest companies in the planet. So one of the things that we thought is like,
whatever we do, it needs to be decentralized. Like, we are not going to try to say, we organize
the events, we are the Elixir company. We always said, like, we want to, for us, the value was always
in growing the cake, instead of having like, we would rather have a small slice of a big cake than
the like, have a whole small cake. So everything is going to be decentralized. You're always going
to laugh. And that reflected in the language is an extensible language that people can get and extend
it to the new domains. This is what we can talk about later. But we had this decentralized approach.
And I was always prepared psychologically, like, these may fail. And this was good because it kind
of like isolated me. I didn't want to say like, I didn't want to do design decisions based on adoption
or popularity. I wanted, if I thought that something is right or wrong, you know, that decision needs
to be isolated from, from necessarily like the feedback that this sort of feedback feedback is
important. But you want to decouple from, if you are failing or succeeding, people say like,
have you ever expected this? And then my answer is, I haven't, but I also by design, I didn't put
too much thought into this. I never thought about where we would go into like, I'm extremely happy
that I was able to, my work was to work on an open source project and create a program of language.
And that for me was a not, you know, and I would do my best to, to foster the community, to,
to foster the ecosystem. But I would not set goals or expectations. But there were moments where I,
where it was like, you know, you get like the thing was like, Oh, like, you know, like, things
are happening. So I think when Dave Thomas, who, you know, was really known programmer when he said
that he's going to write a book on a mixture, within a week, Saint Laurent from O'Reilly,
who was an editor at O'Reilly, he said he was going to write a book as well. So there were like two
books on us within a week. So that was like, that's nice. And then we have like the first
Elixir conf. So those were like really nice, like, um, I think achievements that said, like,
hey, you know, like, I guess other people are is going to use it. And maybe we'll still die,
but we're not going to die like next year, maybe in three years.
Right. Willing this to say this can turn to nothing is pretty important because
especially early on a project, even if you get adoption, it might be like,
localized adoption, where if you just end up stuck focusing on that group,
it might prevent you from actually becoming, like you said, making the cake bigger.
So willing to like kind of kill your own ideas, like make sure that it gets to where where it
needs to get to. It's something that we think about a lot. And it is tough because oftentimes,
your early adopters are your most loyal. The version of what they want you to build is not
necessarily the thing that makes it much bigger. Right. So it's always a tricky thing to juggle.
Yeah. And it's, and even thinking about that, just to give some ideas of the numbers, like,
I started working part time on it in 2012, at some point, especially when the first books were
announced, I think I became full time. And we would have our first client, the first time the
company made money from Elixir was like 2016, like four years later. And for us to kind of say,
the project can support itself. So, you know, it's not like we're paying back, we're just like,
not, we are not like a cost center. It was six years later. Okay. So, you know, it's,
it's really like a long period of time and like a long term investment.
Yeah, almost every project I've seen, because I think when most people discover a framework
or language, it looks pretty like complete by the time they discover it. But it feels like,
oh, this is a new thing I found, it must not be that old. But almost every time you like,
look into how long people have been working on it, it's always much, much longer than you expect,
because getting this stuff right takes a lot of time. And I'm sure there was like different
flavors of what you built that you abandoned and kind of like went a different direction.
The other thing that I was curious about is, so you said at one point is the object oriented,
nuts, you came from the Ruby background. Elixir today just has modules and functions.
And this is something I talk a lot about in the JavaScript world and that you feel like you might
need a lot more than that, but functions organized into groups of modules. That's really all you
need. You can do everything you possibly need to with that. Was it like a moment where that
clicked for you or do you have any thoughts on that pattern? Yeah. So, so going back to history,
right? So when I thought that Elixir needed objects, and the reason why it wasn't rejected
oriented, what I really wanted, and I did not know at the time, is that I wanted dynamic dispatching.
So I wanted to say, so for example, hey, I want to have some sort of contract like,
oh, I want to convert this data structure to product buffs, for example, you need to be
able to specify contracts and you want things to to obey those contracts. In object oriented
languages, especially the dynamic ones, that's a matter of calling a method. You say, look,
if this thing has a true product of method or something like that, or I think maybe like a
generator thing in JavaScript, you know that that thing abides that contract.
And we did not have this in our land. And because we did not have that, I thought,
hey, the solution for these are objects, right? So I added objects. And then a lot of things,
they became clunky as a result of that. And then later I figured out, do I just want the
polymorphic part of projects? And I don't need objects to have that. And that's when I learned
how closure does things, how goal does things, how Haskell does things are like, okay, I'm going
to bring that idea in. I mentioned closure. And I think Rich Hickey, he was, he helped me a lot
to understand those ideas, because one of the way, I think, what is the talk? I'm not sure I'm
going to remember the title of the talk, maybe people in the chat will know and they can comment.
But it was really about how, how you can see things as coupling and how the coupling breaking
those things apart brings you benefits. So for example, if you take an object is by definition,
coupling behavior and state, right? And there are a lot of, a lot of things that come as
consequence of that design. Like, so for example, oh, why you need inheritance is because sometimes
you want to extend because you have to couple the behavior of state. And it comes with its
downsides and then say, well, if you break those things apart, not only you solve problems that
were created by a consequence of you putting things together, but you can now express things
more naturally, right? There are a bunch of like design patterns that happen in object
orientation exactly because of this coupling, like, oh, what if you just want the behavior,
what is just, you just want the state, right? And then start to go in like, you have like
now those data classes and those kinds of things because you have to undo the coupling that you did.
So his talks, it was, have always been like very informative in trying to understand things and,
and, you know, why certain things are advantages, where are the disadvantages? And yeah, and objects
for me, yeah, I see them. Not only it's actually three things is not only the coupling of behavior
and state, but objects, they are also beautiful, which means that they change over time. So you
have like three dimensions now in this one thing. And that's why sometimes like trying to understand
how an object has evolved over time, it gets so complex because all those things, they are all
related to each other. So I remember, for example, like sometime when you, when you would be writing,
like if you're working like on applications, sometimes I have to write a test. And in order for you to
test the scenario that you need, you have to call these and these in the object. Yeah, you have to
build the whole history, right, because all those things, they are coupled. And then you can do the
assertion. So yeah, so, you know, for me, it's like breaking those things apart and being able to see
each of them individually brings a huge amount of clarity to the code, to the point today that
you were saying like earlier that you work with Elixir or functional programming language,
you rewire your brain. And in some ways, it's kind of annoying because when you go back to use a
language that, for example, has mutability everywhere, it kind of makes you paranoid. You're like, wait,
you call a method. They're like, wait, we would mutate my things or not. What can this thing do
that I actually don't know about? Right. So you're kind of like living on the edge. You're like,
what, what can this thing be doing? And then if you break those things apart, you can reason about
them. And I think for the understanding of the software at the end of the day, it is much clearer.
It's interesting because I think people ascribe, I see this all the time where people ascribe
certain properties or capabilities to some feature. They're like, oh, if you don't have classes,
if you don't have object orientation, you can't do x, y, and z. And I actually did a whole stream
where I kept asking the chat saying, okay, name something I can't do without classes. And they kept
saying stuff, but you can do them because they're not properties of like that exact solution. Like
you said, they're actually three separate properties that you can exist on their own. And then I was
able to show there's all sorts of other stuff you can do that are kind of awkward with like the
traditional opposite oriented setup. At least in JavaScript, you know, you can't do like multi
inheritance and how like flipping all of this, you can like compose different things together so
that this behavior actually inherits like three other things that you find useful. When you use
certain abstractions, sometimes you don't really understand what they're providing you or how you
just kind of understand the end, the end feature sets. But yeah, that's a that's another key thing
that when I moved to Elixir, it made me writing code in other because I always had to write JavaScript
for the front end, but it made all of my JavaScript code much better because Elixir kind of taught
me that you can do everything with just these simple things. Just one thing on that, because
there is a quote that I like a lot from a book is it's a it's a more like academic technical book.
They they they start with a programming language. It's principles, concepts, and techniques of
programming languages or something like that. And it's talking about programming language that like
can't do much and it's slowly add features to it like objects concurrency. And one of the quotes
in that book that I like a lot is that you should always use the simplest abstraction available
to solve your problem. And I think it's very powerful because if you think about object,
it's a very powerful abstraction exactly because it has those three things. But a lot of the times
you could be using just simpler things right as you're saying just modules and functions to solve
the problem and have the object to be not the the full solution that you reach into, right?
It's like you should reach into that when you need it. Again, a lot of stuff is arbitrary. You
start working in a language or you start working in a code base to certain patterns that you think
are the way to do things, but it turns out you can kind of reduce it a lot. Yeah, so anyway,
the other thing I was not so we saw a very low level just talking about the language. But another
great thing that I love about Elixir, which I miss so much is the amazing standard library.
So in the JavaScript world, the center library is like, it's not very good. I think especially
compared to other languages, it's one kind of inconsistent internally, just because of the years
of decisions that have changed to just very incomplete, you have to like reach out for external
libraries for basic things. And I think I always point people to is go look at the enum module
in Elixir or go look at the stream module in Elixir. It is such a complete thing. Like almost any
like operation you need to do, there's probably something that's helpful there. My friend made
a joke that there's probably like a enum dot sort by birthdays in there. Like it just like has
everything you possibly could ever need. So when designing the center library, how did you approach
that? Like you take influence from other places? Like how did you decide what belongs in center
library? What what to outsource into external external things? That's a great question. That's
a great question. Because we don't have objects, right? So in Elixir, we have a predefined amount
of data types. So we have lists, we have tuples, we have maps, which are like dictionaries or like
JavaScript objects. But without the behavior part, just the key band association, we have integers,
we have floats, but it's predefined. It's probably about 10 or below 10. So in a way, if you just look
at that, the standard library doesn't have to be large, because you need to cover that surface.
Let's say that's the minimal acceptable, the minimum that I have to do. But we also of course,
we can create our custom structs that, for example, if you want to represent a URL, you can create a
custom struct that belongs to the language. So in order to, I think like growing the standard library
was somewhat focused on solving certain problems and expressing certain capabilities. So for example,
I mentioned lists and I mentioned maps. Both of those things, they are, they are collections.
They can hold different things in them. And then again, Rich Hickey, he had this whole talk about,
if you have collections in your program language, instead of having like three or four different
APIs, right? And then strings, they are collections, but they are lazy. And we also have ranges,
which is like an interval, say it's from one to 10. So I could define like four different APIs
for working with each of those things, like in separate modules, namespaces,
but Rich Hickey, you know, you want to have one namespace where you put everything,
right? And that namespace can work with all different kinds of collections. They can be lazy,
they can be eager. So I was like, okay, that's an important concept. And I want to solve that
problem in the language. So we have in terms, we have streams, and we have some data types that
are very useful to think about that problem. So it was very like specific to the problem.
And then the other one is related to concurrency. So concurrency in the early, I know you know this,
but the audience, yeah. Yeah, concurrency in the, in the early virtual machine, and in the licksire,
it's done by starting processes. And those are not the operating system process. Those are
cheap lightweight threads of execution that exists within the early virtual machine. You can like
literally create million of those. So they are already at the same time, they are all running
concurrently. And those process, they define like some very basic primitives. So for example,
they can send messages between each other. And it doesn't matter if those processes are in the
same node or in different machines in the cluster. That's how we get distribution. But they can only
send a synchronous messages to each other. But one of the things that is very common is that you
want to send a message to a process and get a reply back. So you need some sort of synchronicity
abstraction. So an airline has, they call them behaviors. It has behaviors for something that
works like a server that is client response. So one of the things I was used to say at the time,
when I was starting with Elixir, I was thinking about this, is that we have this great environment
for working with concurrency or even distribution. But if I want to get a simple problem,
so for example, even JavaScript, imagine that you want to access four URLs at the same time,
and you don't want one to block on the other. You can compose that using async away,
something, and then you wait. It's very easy. But in their link, to do that at the time,
it would require a good amount of boilerplate to do that. You would eventually encapsulate
that boilerplate and put in your application, and reuse it. But then everybody is reinventing
their own boilerplate. So Elixir was like, OK, I want to have more specific tools for concurrency
as well. So we have the task module in Elixir, which people usually really enjoy using,
which is about encapsulating those patterns. So it was really focused, I think, on solving
certain problems and closing the gaps in some areas that the online virtual machine was not
solving at the time. So for example, coming from, another example, coming from Ericsson,
Erlang, is, let's say, Swedish technology. And at the beginning, it would handle like
latting one characters, they encode it, would not handle UTF-8. So it was very important.
I like to joke, as a Brazilian person living in Poland and communicating in English,
it was really important for me to handle UTF-8 encoding really, really well.
And so the center library has this string module that also handles all those corner keys for your
upcasing, a string, lower casing, and handle those things that they may be broken in other
ecosystems, right? Like when you upcase a string with my name with the accent, do not do it correctly,
for example. So it was that, and then it was like a good core. But Elixir is going to ask you to
learn things, right? Elixir is a functional programming language. It's a concurrent
distributed language. It's a distributed, concurrent programming language, distributed
programming language. You can create things that are all tolerant. So, and those things,
those for me, they are like non-negotiable properties. Like that's why the language
exists, because those things, they come from Erlang. And because this is a learning process,
even though we love it, we may still lose people who cannot go through this learning curve, right?
They cannot, apart from reason, they cannot go through the process. So I wanted to make sure
that the tooling was great, like the initial experience, like when you create your project,
everything compiles, you can run the test, everything is built in, goal was a huge influence on that.
I think goal was one of the programming languages that said, like, you know, how important tooling
is. Tooling was not part of the programming language. It was something that you would install
separately. And I think goal was really important in changing that. So we're like,
the tooling needs to be great, because in our learning experience, we cannot afford to introduce
any like accidental friction, right? Like the frictions that we can solve, we need to solve.
So that was to focus on, like, I was thinking about all those things, and because they sound
library, today, what I like to say is that, so if you say, I want to add this abstraction to Elixir,
I say there are two reasons for adding an abstraction to Elixir, is because one is that
abstraction can have, it will be enhanced, and it will be able to do things if it is part of the
language, that it would not be possible to do if it was not part of the language. So it has to be
justified to be part of the language. And it's really hard to do this, because Elixir was designed
to be extensible. Anybody can go, it can extend the language. Like the most recent example is that
you can today compile Elixir code to run on the GPU. And that's a project that does not, like,
it doesn't change the language in any way. It's built on top of the existing abstractions.
So that's one of the things, or it's something, or it's an abstraction that we need to build the
language itself. So today, that's kind of the guideline. So we have a very clear process for
somebody to say, "Hey, I want to have this abstraction in the language, cannot I?" If you have to
put at least one of those rows, and then the core is focused, should they? We're not trying to,
so for example, if you want to convert, encoder the code something to JSON, it's not part of this
under library. But we have really great tooling that makes it easy to add that your project in one
line of code, right? But it's a lot of concern that we want to have within the library, we want
to let the ecosystem solve those problems. That's a tricky line, right? So this is a frustration
that I have in the JavaScript world where, I mean, the thing you said about tooling shouldn't be
something you add on top because that's like unnecessary friction. I think it's a great way to
summarize that. Some of the justification I see for that though is people argue that letting the
ecosystem solve those things potentially results in better solutions. I think that's good in theory.
I think in practice, there are certain base things like package management, like things like that,
that when you don't have a really great solution that's built in, it ends up being a fragmented,
annoying experience. I think Go kind of went through that as well, right? Because they didn't
have an opinion in a way to do package management, but they eventually did add that in, and you know,
there was like five or six that kind of emerged, and they kind of took the best ideas and they added
it. And additionally, like when some things aren't in the standard library, and there's like multiple
options. So let's say the thing you talked about, like all the operations you do on collections,
right? The equivalent of that exists in JavaScript as well, but it's spread among like a bunch of
different libraries. Some libraries will be, you know, like more functional, some libraries will be
more class oriented so that the fragmentation is a little painful. But people do argue for
the diversity that happens or the ecosystem solve it. I feel like we're not at a good,
whatever balance there is, you need to find out. I don't think we're at a good balance.
Like, how do you think about this, like diversity argument when it comes to things like the package
management and stuff like that? Yeah, so I know, I think I think you nailed it. It's a it is a trade
off, but I think I think I think I'm not sure if I can come up with like a rule, a precise rule.
Yeah. But I think, but for me, it was like, when it comes to package management, I think like,
it is clear to me that it is part of the onboarding experience. JavaScript, for example, it does
have other luxuries, for example, like, yeah, like you, you know, if you want to do something for the
browser, you have to learn JavaScript, which means that it some of the frictions that we have,
because we have to attract people and then we have to convert to, to, to, to, to convince them,
right, right, they don't want to experience good. It's not necessarily a friction that JavaScript has,
because you can tell anybody, like, everybody has a browser, you can just tell them, like,
open the console and try it out. So I think in a way, it's understandable for them to say, look,
I, we, we, we won, like, we don't have some frictions here. So it's fine for us to have
friction in the package management space. And, and, and that's fine for us. Maybe it's a fine
trade off to do it, but I think, like, so for example, I do write wrap applications. And so we
have the Phoenix web framework. And we went for a lot of churn, like, through the JavaScript, too,
we went through brunch, I think, go for a while, and then went back. And, and now, like, the first
time that I'm, like, really, really happy is when we migrate to yes build, which it just seems to be,
like, stable, very specific. It's not really focused on, like, changing things all the time.
And I'm now really, really happy with it. But, you know, it, it does generate a fraction. And,
like, for me, I think, yes, package management is important enough to, to, to be worth unification.
Maybe you, you don't want to unify within the first x years to let people try out and explore
different approaches. But I think the unification is going to, it is important. And I think, like,
some of the new runtimes, I think they started incorporating more, like, dano and bun. They're,
like, we are all in this problem. And I think, and I think that's a very good sign that, you know,
like, well, this is probably, we, we explored enough. We are comfortable in the solution. And we are,
we are picking, we are picking an approach. And I, if it's really important at some point,
it's to happen. We went through this with, like, releases. So for a while,
Oh, right. Yeah. I do remember that. Yeah. So, like, in the way that you would deploy
elder applications would be how you would deploy, like, JavaScript applications. So you would,
like, say, look, I'm going to run on this thing, it needs to have a node or something.
And I'm saying, like, backend JavaScript is, you need to have node running on that machine,
on that environment, we start it separately, you install the dependencies and you run the thing.
But I think people coming from languages, like Go, which allow you to kind of, like,
I'll just pack everything into this one thing and ship it. They wanted more streamlined solution
for a big chunk of time, like, between, for like two years, if you ask an electric developer,
what is like the biggest pain for elixir applications, they would save to be deployment.
We also have, like, we have a configuration system that we also took time to figure out how
that should work. So for a long period of time, it was seen as like the biggest flaw in elixir.
And then we went to the ecosystem and how they solve those problems to, it was clear for us that
from feedback from the community that it wasn't a problem worth unifying and provide like a
unified experience out of the box that we decided to bring that into the language.
Yeah, there's phases of like, I mean, this is, this happens in business all the time.
There's like the unbundling phase where like, there's like a million little solutions for
everything. And there's like, at some point, it's followed by a bundling phase where that gets like,
consolidated into something unified. So the things you pointed out about the new run times,
I think, yeah, we might be entering a consolidation phase, hopefully. But yeah, it's like,
there's just been a lot, even on the package management side in JavaScript, right, you can use
NPM, you can use PNPM, you can use yarn. And on some hand, these, each projects did improve on
the previous ones, but the state-wearing isn't as weird fragmentation. And if someone is new,
they're just like, there's always a conversation about, okay, like, bring the project weight,
do you have NPM and so, oh, sorry, do you have PNPM install? And they're like, what is that?
And then you have to teach them about that. So those little friction, frictions are hard,
even though I think you made a good point about everyone's forced to do JavaScript. Like you,
you have to pretty much because you do web stuff. So the barge, I guess didn't have to be as high
to get adoption. And that might, that might reflect why some of the cultural things are there where
we expect very little from the ecosystem and the tooling. So the thing I wanted to ask about,
so now that we're talking about more of the ecosystem stuff, so we started with like the
language, kind of moving on to some of the other stuff. You know, Elixir is not just a language,
the fantastic set of ecosystem projects like Ecto and Phoenix. And so Ecto is for the audience,
it's like, how you talk to your database in the JavaScript world, you have things like Prisma
or Drizzle, things like that. And then Phoenix is a web framework. So when did those start to
emerge? And I don't know, I know like, that was more, I know Chris McCord was very involved in
some of those things, but yeah, when did that start to emerge as like things you wanted to
make sure the ecosystem had? You know, I was always thinking about the language
being extensible. And then, and I knew it would be used for web, because that was my background,
that's where I had rich. I knew people, you know, they were coming from Elixir, a lot of them were
coming from like Ruby or from, if I was invited to a conference, it was usually a web related
conference, even if it was not about Ruby. So I knew like, eventually something would appear.
But even early one, when I was trying to validate if the language was extensible,
I built like a mini web framework, like Express or Sinatra or Ruby, just to see like, hey,
is this thing actually extensible? And to try to, like, try to dog food, what I was building,
but people are like, are we going to maintain this? And I'm like, hell no, no way. I did, I did my
share of like a web framework, and I don't plan to start like doing this. I want to explore the
ideas. So, Acto came first, which was a database driver. And this was from Eric Middle Johnson.
He is the creator of Hacks B.M., which is the package manager. So he did like an amazing work,
because the community was at the very beginning. I'm almost sure he was still at university. And he
was like, oh, we need a package manager. So he built the whole package manager and the whole
package manager infrastructure. But because we didn't have something to talk to the database,
he built the libraries to talk to the database and the ORMs. So he was like, okay, I'm building
everything. And everything that I'm building is this open source thing, right? And I'm going to
build on top of that. And the thing about the web framework, it was really interesting because
because of the background, there are a lot of projects at the time that were trying to be like
rails for Elixir, or it was trying to be like the Sinatra for Elixir. And they were exploring
those different approaches. But it was really like, you know, rails for Elixir. And Phoenix was
actually, so when Chris McCord started with Phoenix, he did not start by having rails for Elixir.
What he actually wanted to do is that he wanted to create like rich interactive applications,
where you could exchange information with the server and receive it back at any time.
And he was trying to do that in rails. And then it was not working out. Things could not work,
plus you complex could not scale. And then he heard about Elixir, and he decided to solve that
problem. And for me, that's why it worked. He was trying to bring itself into the platform.
He was like, oh, I want to leverage this platform in the best way possible. The platform was the
solution to that problem. And he built Phoenix around that. And that's why today we have things
like live view, because everything was designed from like the rich interactive user experience
angle. And so I remember seeing a presentation. I don't remember if it was on the first or the
second Elixir call. And I was like, immediately sold. I was like, all right, like, this is it.
And then I got involved in the project. I also see like my job, like making sure so. And then,
so for example, web was expected. I knew I was going to happen. But for example,
other things came out later, for example, nerves, which is great work for building,
yeah, for building high-end embedded systems. I am not, it's not a domain that I'm familiar with.
But I see it my responsibility to make sure that they are not blocked, right? Like, if they have
an issue with the language, they have an issue with the tooling. It's my job to make sure that
they can address that and evolve further and not be blocked. So, you know, always trying to get
people excited about building new ideas, new domains on top of the language.
Yeah. I mean, it's amazing how far it's spread, right? So we thought of that web framework,
you mentioned nerves. Like, I remember, so when I was getting really into Elixir,
I was like trying to use it in places that was not appropriate. And I was working at a company
that did have an IoT device. And I was like, let's put Elixir on it. And we were like doing
something with Elixir. And it ended up not sticking. And like, you know, they have their
stuff in Go. So they moved to Go. They initially started in C. So going from C to Go, like much,
much big improvement just for productivity of the team. But then like six months later,
nerves came out and I was like, Oh, so I'm not, I wasn't a complete idiot. I did feel like this
makes a lot because like this, all the supervisor stuff, like there's a bunch of different tasks
that needs to run on these IoT devices and you see the schedule and coordinate them. So it felt
like the Elixir primitives made a lot of sense there. And I saw nerves come out and I was like,
okay, I wasn't dumb. This like actually doesn't make sense. And that part has grown so much as
well. It's really like, I don't know if you probably never imagined that that would be a thing, right?
Yeah, no, I would never, if you told me, like there are a lot of things that we do today.
Like if you get in a time machine and say, hey, Elixir would have those things out, but like, sure,
sure, right? And then starting from nerves, it's also so cool because they had experience from
building embedded systems, right? And they were like, well, we have this Wi-Fi driver thing.
And it crashes all the time because, you know, the Wi-Fi disconnects or because it's like,
driver, you know, C operating system code. And then when they heard about supervisors,
which is something that when there is a crash, it restarts itself. You're like,
that's what we need. And then, and that's what drove them. And then what, and I think at the
beginning, they were actually earling. And then what drove them to Elixir was the tooling. They
were like, we had the abstractions, but we also want the tooling. They were, they, the tooling and
making it faster, making it easier for you to get started and build something,
was something that really resonated with them. But like, today, like, yeah, you can,
you can get, you can write Elixir and it's going to compile to the GPU. And you can get like,
large machine learning models and run the GPU. And you can deploy in a cluster and route requests
to them. Those are things that like, you know, starting like the machine learning thing, even if
it went like three years ago, I would not believe that it would be something that would be happening.
Yeah. Yeah. It is really crazy. It's, it's in every space now. Like, no matter what you're doing,
there is probably what to do with the Elixir. And it actually makes sense. You're not forcing
it at all. But we talked about the language. We talked about the tooling. We talked about frameworks.
But there's also like patterns, right? Like, how do you build applications that are maintainable?
And in the Phoenix docs, they teach you about bounded context and like domain-driven design and all
of that. And that's another thing that's sorely missing from the JavaScript ecosystem. It's kind
of like, you're on your own to figure that out. There's no like guidance on like building this
reliable maintainable system. So like, wait, wait, where did that come from? How come that was an
important story? No. Yeah. It's, it's so, it's so curious to hear that because this was, and maybe
it still is, in some way, it's a little bit of a, I don't know what is, I don't want to use the word
polemic because it's not really polemic, but it's something that it leads to questioning if that was
the good call. But, but for example, like what I've always, what I've always tried to do, so going
back to the failed prototype, what I learned is that it's not because some other language does it,
is that it's going to be a good thing, right? We have to think about like what, what, what the
thing is doing and why and what are the benefits and if that thing needs to make sense. But if you
think, and so you always have to reason about the process. And, but even then like, it's, it's hard
to be on guard all the time and not have something is leap through because that's how you always did
thing. So you just continue doing that way because that's how you always did it. So like in the first
version of vector, our database thing, we had like, we solved some problems that I think really
elegantly compared to, to other frameworks. So I love vector change sets, for example, which is
something that builds how you want to make a change to the database. While all other languages are
kind of like doing it implicitly, you imitate the object and that other things reflected,
active allows you to build and build like this whole lineage of like the things that you want to do,
and absolutely love it. But sometimes we'll just add callbacks, for example, and add things that
are really just coupled to, to your data. And, and it took a while for us like, to learn those
things. And again, especially because all we have is modules and functions, right? So how can you get
a structure out of that, right? And then Phoenix context was a way of saying, okay, we are going
to provide like some guidance to you. But so you, when you organize our code, you don't want to just
like put everything into a flat name space and just throw everything out there. That's clear to us.
You also don't want like, you don't want to have like the, the God objects, because usually what
happens in those systems that you have tables with 200 columns, because you're just putting things. So
what is the guidance that we can give people to say, Hey, you know, you may want to think
how those things relate to each other and start organizing them into like distinct context. So
there was a lot of discussion. And at the beginning, we had, we had a concern that this would lead like
to a paralysis fear or something like that, you know, like people, because now you're asking people to
to like think, right? And like, Hey, you have to think how you want to organize your code. But maybe
you are at a point out of your project where like, look, I don't care, honestly, I just want to ship
this and have this proof of concept ready to show to somebody, right? So there was some friction on
that because like asking people to think is great. But if they don't want to think for whatever reason,
that's friction. And it's, it's fine to acknowledge that. Yeah, it's fine if you don't want to think
about it now, but you know, at some point, you may want to. So later we were like, well, if you want
to define one context for database table, that's not how you should do. But if you want to do that,
it's fine. But we have to think about the consequences and tell me about design. And that was something
that I don't think there was like a unique moment for that to happen. It was really like learning
from the mistakes that we've copied, learning from the new things, looking at the programs that we
wrote, and trying to learn from that and how we can reach a better code. It was a long process.
Yeah, no, and I think you guys landed a very good spot because even to this day, and we
struggle with that too, right? It's the same thing. Like you can make something we want if we really
want to focus on maintainability, like code basis is last for years, like how do we help people achieve
that? But that doesn't look great as a first look at what we're trying to learn something. If
I have feels overwhelming, like too much of that balance is tricky. But to this day, and I'm a
big proponent of like on the domain driven design stuff, but if you go and look like Google that
phrase, you end up with like a thick book like this that has all of these concepts and it's like
very complicated. So I to this day, I still tell people, here's a link to the Phoenix Docs. I know
we're not doing elixir, just go read the ideas of how they think about these things. It's not too
extreme. It's going to be helpful. And you should organize your code in that way. But it still provides
that long term maintainability thing. And I was like, yeah, don't focus on elixir part. And the
docs aren't even too focused on elixir at least the parts where they're explaining the ideas about
a context. But that's how I tell people to kind of like, first, like understand these ideas and why
they make sense. Yeah. And and we didn't want you said exactly like we didn't want to say it was a
bounded context. And we didn't want to mention the DDT exactly because then somebody's going to
search for the DDT. And it's like a really thick book. Yeah. Right. And and and that would add to
like to they were like, well, if somebody knows the DD, then we immediately recognize it. Right.
So we don't have to tell them, right? But we also don't think that grasping all the like big parts
of the DDT should be a day one requirement for you to jump into Phoenix. So we we we try to distill
that. I'm in the TypeScript world now. So big thing is the type safety stuff. And I saw that I think
you just put out like a recent paper on some of the type safety research on elixir. So elixir has
gotten massive without having like an incredible type safety solution. You know, that's still an
area that I think is interesting. And I think you guys have been exploring. So I think just just
for the audience, like what's like a summary of like the current state of things and where do you
see potential? Yeah. So yeah, it's funny because they stack overflow survey results came out like
two days ago. And what is the term that they use admire like the true most admired languages is
Rust, which is like really statically typed like to the point that error location is
guided by the type system. And then the second one is elixir, which is not a very dynamic language.
Like, so that's something else that in the elixir, because we have better matching and we have
parts, we actually usually know what what are the types and the things that we are working with.
So it but it is a dynamic language. So I thought it was very interesting. And but for us, like why
we are doing this, I think we've like the elixir team did a good job of listening to the community,
like historically. So like back, this is probably now, I mean, seven, eight years ago,
like a lot of people they were wanting for them for a matter, because the language,
the language was started to grow and getting adopted. So now people are working in larger teams.
And then you started having like discussions about, hey, you know, what is,
how you're going to format this. And somebody's like, oh, you should do in this style. And then
we had some form matters in the community. And then, and then that was one of the things that were like,
okay, it needs to be unified, because if it's not unified, like you're always going to have the
discussion, like somebody in the project going to want to use this tool, or this other tool,
you're like, it's going to be unified, very few configuration options for, for better or worse,
and it is what it is. And it's something that, for example, I struggle at the beginning,
like with the formatter, right, like there's like the joke, like the best formatted code is the
code that I write, right is, and then, and then I was pretty much in that camp. And, and as we're
writing the formatter, we were discussing with the team. And then I was looking at my own code,
and then was, what is the logic for formatting this? And there was actually no logic. It was just like,
it was just like, you know, whatever, it's like, I think this is better. So it was a hard process,
but we were like, you're going to be better because of it, and then deploying. So if you ask
that lecture committee today, what is the biggest thing that is missing in the language,
they are going to say static typing. It's like, it's like the huge majority is not like, you know,
it's like more like two more than two thirds. So I think it's, I say like, we are not, I'm not
sure if I was going to be static with five at the end. But I think I, we have to give a honest try.
Like, we have to try to do it. I tried to do it like five years ago, absolutely set, but I'm used
with my prototype second. And, and now we are like partnering with a senior researcher, all types
systems, we have a PhD student, because the thing is, usually when I started a program in language,
right, and say, I want to have types, you design the program in language with the type system.
And when you are in that scenario, doesn't apply to type script, but when you are in that scenario,
usually the type script, the type system is restricting the language. There are things that, you know,
you think it would be like, if you look at the program, it's like, hey, maybe this should be
possible. But the types of things are going to be like, no, you can't do that, because I can't
understand that. Right. And languages, I go, they, they use the type system as a mechanism to restrict
the language and make sure that the language is simple. Right. But if you have an dynamic language,
like there was nothing restricted. So it has a large expressive power. There's a lot of things
that you can do. Right. So the challenge is that, well, we need to find out a type system that is
going to obey the rules of this existing language. Right. And most likely, you're not going to have
to get a hundred percent fit. Right. It's not possible. You're going to have to make trade-offs.
And when you don't have this a hundred percent fit, two things are going to happen. One,
because the type system does not understand that code, it's going to say, hey, this code is not
valid. But if you remove the types, the code runs. But if you add the types, the type like,
this code is not valid. I cannot understand it. Right. So that's one of the things that can happen.
But the other thing that can happen is that it can say, oh, I don't understand this code. So I'm
going to do is I'm going to introduce a dynamic or a types create any. But every time we introduce
the any, it means that you're getting fewer guarantees from the type system. Right. So that's
the trade-off. So what what we are doing is that, so we were in the research stage. And we were like,
okay, how do we have a type system that can map and understand as much of the next
language as possible? So we are working, you know, with the research of the PhD student as
actually to do that. And it was really valuable work with them because we were able to get a type
system that is based on set theoretic types and then we talk about it very briefly. That is based
on set theoretic types and apply it to the language. And in the parts that it did not apply, they
actually went and developed new theory. You're like, we can't do that. We are going to like to
develop theory that like the mathematical proof that I actually don't understand. And we are going
to prove that this is good. So we can incorporate that into the language. So right now we have the
formalization of a type system that connects press like a really large amount of adductor
idioms and adductor features. So that's important. And that's based on set theoretic types. And what
that means, it's something is that the type operations you think about everything as set
operations, which for me, it's really important because set operations, you know, we learned them
like early on, right, high school or even before we think about unions in intersections. It's easy
for us to reason when things belong to a set or not. So a lot of the things that if you work with
type language, like, oh, bounded polymorphism, subtyping, like all those fancy things for us,
it's always going to be, oh, that's asking if something belongs to a set. That's the union of
just sets. So that's really elegant. So when I've learned about the approach, I really enjoyed it.
And that's what we did. So we have something that in theory maps really well to literary idioms.
And we are getting out of the research approach, we're sorry, we're getting out of the research
stage. And now we are heading to, so that's a very big validation. But we're with working practice,
we have to be efficient. So for example, imagine that we have the type of system,
and analytical piles, like two times is lower, five times is lower. Is that a trade off that we
are comfortable with making? So what we'll do is that we'll start implementing the type of system.
And because in Elixir, again, you usually know the types that you have because of pattern matching
cards, our goal is to actually leverage this information and feed that into the type of system.
So we can start giving you type errors without you declaring any type whatsoever. And this is
going to be great because it's going to be you won't have to change your code. You get feedback.
We are going to use this as an opportunity to improve their messages, make sure the experience
is great. We are going to use it as a way to validate the performance. And then if for some reason,
we are not happy with this initial stage, we'll be like, all right, you never have to change the
language anyway. They're just going to get a type of system. We are going to throw it out.
We gave our honesty for it. But if it really works, then we can go to the next stage and tell users
now you can start writing types. And so that's what we are doing. It's really like, it's really,
I think it's like, it's really a honest of thought in trying to make this work in a way that it feels
part of the language that it doesn't feel fragmented. It doesn't feel like the language becomes like
those two different things where one is dynamic and one is static. That's what we want to do.
But it's still unclear. I always try to temper people's expectations. Like, the answer may be no,
the answer may be like, it's still not doable. And we'll try again in 10 years.
Yeah, yeah. No, that makes a lot of sense. I mean, thanks for that summary. That's pretty exciting
because, yeah, it's the thing you said about all the pattern matching code you write. There's just
such useful information there. I think a lot of people think about, especially when they compare
to Rust, right, they think about a type system isn't useful unless it's like complete or like
entirely sound. But what most people are asking for is like better hints when they're writing the
code and just being able to infer more of that from the code they've already written. Like,
that's already like a huge milestone. Like, it's like a first step. You know, it can only get better
from there. So yeah, I think for me, when I desired type safety in Elixir, I just meant like,
like a little bit more than what we have today. And that kind of brings me to a practically like
a good place. So I think for me, like inferring from the code you writes, that's kind of what I
think of when I think about, you know, when I want type safety, I don't necessarily think about like,
you know, writing my types first and like doing all the time writing my implementation from the
code, which I do do sometimes, but it's not like the default way to work on things. So yeah, I mean,
I'm really excited that you guys do not research and excited to see what that ends up.
Yeah, and I think, and I think what exactly to describe, I think it's a common sentiment.
A lot of people, they're not like, we want the type system because I wanted to catch 100%
of my bugs or something like that. But it's because they're like,
we recognize and we appreciate that a type system is going to lead to a better experience.
And even though it's not perfect, the better experience is worth it. But we'll try to
the vote, we'll try to do the correct and good experience. And we'll see where it's going to fall
flat. Yeah, yeah, I think TypeScript has proven like, that's like the common sentiment as well,
because again, TypeScript is not like 100% correct or sound type system. But the amount of adoption
has gotten. People like it despite that, right? So yeah, that does make a lot of sense.
Cool. So that's, that's everything I had. Just as like a summary to the audience,
the stuff we talked about, there's like a one or so hour conversation.
We covered a good amount of stuff that exists in the Elixir space. This is still just a tiny,
there's so much so much more that we hadn't really covered. I just strongly recommend
that everyone doesn't matter if you're going to use it in production. It doesn't matter if it
makes sense at your company. Go explore it. There's just so many good ideas there that you can learn
from that will make the rest of your code better. Just be inspired from like, just like, like Jose
has been talking about the overall ecosystem, the way it all comes together and the consistency.
And just like, there's so many places where you can use Elixir. I think that just
will change our expectations out of whatever language you're using today. There's a lot of
opportunity for inspiration. Yeah, I, yeah, I've, thanks for having me. I really enjoyed it. And
everybody have a great weekend. Yeah. And see you around. All right. Yeah. Good day.